README.md, before:

# ClimateReady

ClimateReady is a mobile-first climate resilience companion. The Expo and React Native app equips households and communities with personalised preparedness guidance, SOS coordination, and practical learning tools. The project also contains a Node/Express backend for community content and a Vite web dashboard that lets emergency contacts follow live SOS sessions.

---

## Highlights
- **Preparedness hub** with weather-aware alerts, household checklists, and education modules that work offline-first.
- **SOS activation pipeline** that shares live GPS tracks, manages emergency contacts, and records follow-up history.
- **Safe zone discovery** powered by Google Places and curated Firestore data, rendered on interactive native maps.
- **Community collaboration** via moderated discussion boards, live chat, and notification feeds backed by MongoDB.
- **Training simulations** including mini games for floods, hurricanes, medical emergencies, and more.

## Architecture at a Glance
- **Mobile app (`app/`)** – Expo SDK 54, React Native 0.81, Expo Router navigation, TypeScript throughout.
- **Backend server (`server/`)** – Express + MongoDB Atlas servicing community posts, moderation, and sockets.
- **SOS tracker (`sos-live-tracker-map/`)** – Vite + React web client consuming Firestore for real-time maps.
- **Shared libraries** – Firebase Auth + Firestore, Socket.io, Expo Notifications, Google Maps/Places SDKs.

## Tech Stack
- Expo SDK 54, React Native 0.81, Expo Router, Reanimated, Expo Location & Task Manager.
- TypeScript + ESLint with Expo config; Gradle-managed Android project for custom permissions and build variants.
- Firebase Authentication, Firestore, Cloud Messaging, Functions (via REST helpers).
- Express, Socket.io, Mongoose, and Hugging Face moderation on the server.
- Vite, React Router, Firebase Web SDK, Google Maps JavaScript API for the SOS tracker.

## Repository Layout
- `app/` – mobile screens, tab stacks, and feature flows (SOS, community, toolkit, safe zones).
- `components/` – reusable UI (notifications bell, toolkit cards, game UIs).
- `context/` – providers for authentication, localisation, SOS state.
- `features/` – domain-specific modules such as `safe-zones/` with maps, hooks, and services.
- `utils/` & `services/` – cross-cutting helpers (push registration, Firestore access, weather thresholds, API client).
- `android/` – Gradle project generated by Expo prebuild and customised for location/background permissions.
- `server/` – Express API, socket gateway, moderation services, Mongoose models, and `.env` driven config.
- `sos-live-tracker-map/` – web dashboard codebase with its own build tooling and Firebase setup.
- `docs/` – developer documentation including [`command-reference.md`](docs/command-reference.md).

## Prerequisites
- Node.js **18 LTS** or newer and npm (ships with Node).
- JDK **17** with `JAVA_HOME` configured (Gradle builds).
- Android Studio with SDK **36**, NDK **27.1.12297006**, an emulator or USB-debuggable Android device.
- MongoDB Atlas connection string (see `server/.env`) for backend services.
- Optional: [Expo Dev Client](https://docs.expo.dev/clients/development-builds/introduction/), EAS CLI, Vercel CLI.

## Setup
```powershell
git clone https://github.com/NIKKAvRULZ/ClimateReady.git
cd ClimateReady
npm install
```

### Environment Variables
Create a root `.env` for Expo/React Native variables consumed by `app.config.js` and runtime helpers:

```
EXPO_PUBLIC_PROJECT_ID=<eas-project-id>
EXPO_PUBLIC_API_BASE=<mobile-api-base-url>
OPENWEATHER_API_KEY=<openweather-key>
SOS_WEB_APP_URL=<https://your-sos-tracker.example>
GEMINI_API_KEY=<optional-google-gemini-key>
```

Server-specific variables live in `server/.env` (example file committed):

```
PORT=4000
MONGODB_URI=<mongodb-atlas-connection-string>
CLIENT_ORIGIN=http://localhost:8081
HUGGINGFACE_API_KEY=<optional-hf-token>
HF_MODERATION_MODEL=unitary/toxic-bert
```

The SOS tracker web app reads from `sos-live-tracker-map/.env` (see `.env.example` for the full list) covering Firebase web credentials and Google Maps API keys.

> ℹ️ When experimenting locally, export `EXPO_PUBLIC_PROJECT_ID` in your PowerShell session (`$env:EXPO_PUBLIC_PROJECT_ID = "..."`) before running native builds so push registration succeeds.

## Running the Mobile App
1. Build/install the development client (first run or after native changes):
   ```powershell
   npx expo run:android --variant development
   ```
2. Launch Metro in dev-client mode and scan the QR code in Expo Go or use USB debugging:
   ```powershell
   npx expo start --dev-client
   ```
3. Review additional maintenance commands (ADB, Gradle clean, logcat filters) in [`docs/command-reference.md`](docs/command-reference.md).
4. Lint the project before committing:
   ```powershell
   npm run lint
   ```

### Key Mobile Modules
- **SOS Flow:** `app/tabs/sos.tsx`, `utils/sos/` services, Expo background location tasks for continual tracking.
- **Safe Zones:** `features/safe-zones/` for Google Places fetchers, Firestore fallbacks, and map rendering.
- **Community:** `app/community/`, `services/api.ts`, socket listeners, and push notification hooks.
- **Toolkit & Games:** `components/game/` and `app/toolKit/` provide educational simulations and progress tracking.

## Running the Backend Server
```powershell
cd server
npm install
npm run dev
```
- Serves REST endpoints for posts, comments, notifications (`/api/posts`, `/api/community-notifications`).
- Maintains a Socket.io gateway (`/socket.io`) for real-time chat and SOS broadcasts.
- Applies rule-based and Hugging Face powered moderation prior to persisting community content.
- Uses the service account JSON in `server/climateready-40665-firebase-adminsdk-*.json` for Firebase Admin operations.

## Running the SOS Tracker Web App
```powershell
cd sos-live-tracker-map
npm install
npm run dev
```
- Consumes Firestore documents keyed by SOS session IDs with token validation (`src/utils/TokenValidator`).
- Provides debugging tools (`TokenDebugHelper`, `SosDebugDashboard`) to verify emergency access links.
- Built with Vite; production builds (`npm run build`) output to `sos-live-tracker-map/dist` and deploy cleanly to Vercel (see `vercel.json`).

## Testing & Quality
- `npm run lint` – ESLint with Expo configuration for TypeScript.
- Manual QA: run `adb logcat -s ReactNativeJS ReactNative Expo AndroidRuntime` to watch native crashes, and use `npm run dev` within `server/` while exercising community flows.
- There are no automated unit tests yet; contributions adding Jest or Detox coverage are welcome.

## Deployment Notes
- **Mobile builds:** Use EAS Build or local Gradle (`npx expo run:android --variant release`) after updating environment variables and Firebase config files (`google-services.json`).
- **Backend:** Deploy the Express server to a Node-friendly host (Render, Railway, Fly.io). Ensure environment variables and Firebase service account secrets are provided.
- **SOS tracker:** Deploy the Vite build to Vercel (default config supplied) or any static hosting with HTTPS and correct Firebase/Maps domains allowed.

## Contributing
1. Fork & clone the repo; create a feature branch from `main` or the active working branch.
2. Follow the setup steps above and keep documentation/screenshots in sync with UI changes.
3. Run `npm run lint` for the mobile app and `npm run lint` (if added) for subprojects before opening a PR.
4. Describe testing steps and include any necessary `.env.example` updates when submitting changes.

## License
ClimateReady is released under the [MIT License](LICENSE).

Commit message:

docs: update README with repository links and clarification for SOS tracker source

README.md, after:

# ClimateReady

ClimateReady is a mobile-first climate resilience companion. The Expo and React Native app equips households and communities with personalised preparedness guidance, SOS coordination, and practical learning tools. The project also contains a Node/Express backend for community content and a Vite web dashboard that lets emergency contacts follow live SOS sessions.

---

## Highlights
- **Preparedness hub** with weather-aware alerts, household checklists, and education modules that work offline-first.
- **SOS activation pipeline** that shares live GPS tracks, manages emergency contacts, and records follow-up history.
- **Safe zone discovery** powered by Google Places and curated Firestore data, rendered on interactive native maps.
- **Community collaboration** via moderated discussion boards, live chat, and notification feeds backed by MongoDB.
- **Training simulations** including mini games for floods, hurricanes, medical emergencies, and more.

## Architecture at a Glance
- **Mobile app (`app/`)** – Expo SDK 54, React Native 0.81, Expo Router navigation, TypeScript throughout.
- **Backend server (`server/`)** – Express + MongoDB Atlas servicing community posts, moderation, and sockets.
- **SOS tracker (`sos-live-tracker-map/`)** – Vite + React web client consuming Firestore for real-time maps. The source lives in a companion repository at [`R-Tharanka/sos-live-tracker-map`](https://github.com/R-Tharanka/sos-live-tracker-map.git) and is vendored here for local development.
- **Shared libraries** – Firebase Auth + Firestore, Socket.io, Expo Notifications, Google Maps/Places SDKs.

## Tech Stack
- Expo SDK 54, React Native 0.81, Expo Router, Reanimated, Expo Location & Task Manager.
- TypeScript + ESLint with Expo config; Gradle-managed Android project for custom permissions and build variants.
- Firebase Authentication, Firestore, Cloud Messaging, Functions (via REST helpers).
- Express, Socket.io, Mongoose, and Hugging Face moderation on the server.
- Vite, React Router, Firebase Web SDK, Google Maps JavaScript API for the SOS tracker.

## Repository Layout
- `app/` – mobile screens, tab stacks, and feature flows (SOS, community, toolkit, safe zones).
- `components/` – reusable UI (notifications bell, toolkit cards, game UIs).
- `context/` – providers for authentication, localisation, SOS state.
- `features/` – domain-specific modules such as `safe-zones/` with maps, hooks, and services.
- `utils/` & `services/` – cross-cutting helpers (push registration, Firestore access, weather thresholds, API client).
- `android/` – Gradle project generated by Expo prebuild and customised for location/background permissions.
- `server/` – Express API, socket gateway, moderation services, Mongoose models, and `.env` driven config.
- `sos-live-tracker-map/` – web dashboard codebase with its own build tooling and Firebase setup.
- `docs/` – developer documentation including [`command-reference.md`](docs/command-reference.md).

## Prerequisites
- Node.js **18 LTS** or newer and npm (ships with Node).
- JDK **17** with `JAVA_HOME` configured (Gradle builds).
- Android Studio with SDK **36**, NDK **27.1.12297006**, an emulator or USB-debuggable Android device.
- MongoDB Atlas connection string (see `server/.env`) for backend services.
- Optional: [Expo Dev Client](https://docs.expo.dev/clients/development-builds/introduction/), EAS CLI, Vercel CLI.

## Setup
```powershell
git clone https://github.com/R-Tharanka/ClimateReady.git
cd ClimateReady
npm install
```

### Environment Variables
Create a root `.env` for Expo/React Native variables consumed by `app.config.js` and runtime helpers:

```
EXPO_PUBLIC_PROJECT_ID=<eas-project-id>
EXPO_PUBLIC_API_BASE=<mobile-api-base-url>
OPENWEATHER_API_KEY=<openweather-key>
SOS_WEB_APP_URL=<https://your-sos-tracker.example>
GEMINI_API_KEY=<optional-google-gemini-key>
```

Server-specific variables live in `server/.env` (example file committed):

```
PORT=4000
MONGODB_URI=<mongodb-atlas-connection-string>
CLIENT_ORIGIN=http://localhost:8081
HUGGINGFACE_API_KEY=<optional-hf-token>
HF_MODERATION_MODEL=unitary/toxic-bert
```

The SOS tracker web app reads from `sos-live-tracker-map/.env` (see `.env.example` for the full list) covering Firebase web credentials and Google Maps API keys.

> ℹ️ When experimenting locally, export `EXPO_PUBLIC_PROJECT_ID` in your PowerShell session (`$env:EXPO_PUBLIC_PROJECT_ID = "..."`) before running native builds so push registration succeeds.

## Running the Mobile App
1. Build/install the development client (first run or after native changes):
   ```powershell
   npx expo run:android --variant development
   ```
2. Launch Metro in dev-client mode and scan the QR code in Expo Go or use USB debugging:
   ```powershell
   npx expo start --dev-client
   ```
3. Review additional maintenance commands (ADB, Gradle clean, logcat filters) in [`docs/command-reference.md`](docs/command-reference.md).
4. Lint the project before committing:
   ```powershell
   npm run lint
   ```

### Key Mobile Modules
- **SOS Flow:** `app/tabs/sos.tsx`, `utils/sos/` services, Expo background location tasks for continual tracking.
- **Safe Zones:** `features/safe-zones/` for Google Places fetchers, Firestore fallbacks, and map rendering.
- **Community:** `app/community/`, `services/api.ts`, socket listeners, and push notification hooks.
- **Toolkit & Games:** `components/game/` and `app/toolKit/` provide educational simulations and progress tracking.

## Running the Backend Server
```powershell
cd server
npm install
npm run dev
```
- Serves REST endpoints for posts, comments, notifications (`/api/posts`, `/api/community-notifications`).
- Maintains a Socket.io gateway (`/socket.io`) for real-time chat and SOS broadcasts.
- Applies rule-based and Hugging Face powered moderation prior to persisting community content.
- Uses the service account JSON in `server/climateready-40665-firebase-adminsdk-*.json` for Firebase Admin operations.

## Running the SOS Tracker Web App
```powershell
cd sos-live-tracker-map
npm install
npm run dev
```
- Consumes Firestore documents keyed by SOS session IDs with token validation (`src/utils/TokenValidator`).
- Provides debugging tools (`TokenDebugHelper`, `SosDebugDashboard`) to verify emergency access links.
- Built with Vite; production builds (`npm run build`) output to `sos-live-tracker-map/dist` and deploy cleanly to Vercel (see `vercel.json`).
- Source of truth: [`https://github.com/R-Tharanka/sos-live-tracker-map`](https://github.com/R-Tharanka/sos-live-tracker-map.git). Keep this submodule clone in sync with upstream for the latest fixes.

## Testing & Quality
- `npm run lint` – ESLint with Expo configuration for TypeScript.
- Manual QA: run `adb logcat -s ReactNativeJS ReactNative Expo AndroidRuntime` to watch native crashes, and use `npm run dev` within `server/` while exercising community flows.
- There are no automated unit tests yet; contributions adding Jest or Detox coverage are welcome.

## Deployment Notes
- **Mobile builds:** Use EAS Build or local Gradle (`npx expo run:android --variant release`) after updating environment variables and Firebase config files (`google-services.json`).
- **Backend:** Deploy the Express server to a Node-friendly host (Render, Railway, Fly.io). Ensure environment variables and Firebase service account secrets are provided.
- **SOS tracker:** Deploy the Vite build to Vercel (default config supplied) or any static hosting with HTTPS and correct Firebase/Maps domains allowed.

## Contributing
1. Fork & clone the repo; create a feature branch from `main` or the active working branch.
2. Follow the setup steps above and keep documentation/screenshots in sync with UI changes.
3. Run `npm run lint` for the mobile app and `npm run lint` (if added) for subprojects before opening a PR.
4. Describe testing steps and include any necessary `.env.example` updates when submitting changes.

## License
ClimateReady is released under the [MIT License](LICENSE).
